Last looks before closing the books: It’s sort of Round 3.1 of the BuzzMeter as several panelists have fine-tuned their Oscar winner predictions following other awards results. So if you’re looking to polish your Oscar-pool picks ... now’s the time! How have their predictions been lining up with the guilds, and how will they be affected by the critics’ groups? Two categories that have seen a lot of movement recently, and two others are tilting toward new directions. As they do each round, the BuzzMeter panelists have ranked their picks in each category, with the top choice receiving the most points and the bottom receiving the fewest. Have your own ideas about who and what will get Oscar roses? Fill out your own slates in our polls. This week: We feature our awards geniuses’ winner predictions in one of the categories making the biggest late shifts: supporting actor. Next week: All polls will be open!   1. Troy Kotsur (“CODA”)2. Kodi Smit-McPhee (“The Power of the Dog”)3. Ciarán Hinds (“Belfast”)4. J.K. Simmons (“Being the Ricardos”)5. Jesse Plemons (“The Power of the Dog”) There’s a new leader in the clubhouse. Kodi Smit-McPhee had been the favorite since Round 1 for his work in “The Power of the Dog,” and held that spot until now — but following big wins on the circuit, Troy Kotsur as the freewheeling dad in “CODA” is now No. 1, according to the BuzzMeter. “Smit-McPhee has had people talking for months now, but ‘CODA’ has made a late surge, including high-profile victories for Kotsur,” says panelist Dave Karger. “So I’m expecting [Kotsur] to have a history-making victory.” After becoming the first male deaf actor to receive an Oscar nomination, Kotsur told The Times, “With subtitles and sign language, [‘CODA’ is] an inclusive story that can give the folks a new perspective. … So don’t limit yourselves, Hollywood. You need to break down these barriers and be fearless and do something new. There’s no rules in art, are there?” Also on the side of Kotsur’s candidacy: While the surprise nomination of Jesse Plemons may be evidence of the academy’s fondness for “Dog,” it also presents a vote-splitting scenario that could benefit the “CODA” star. However, while that may have been a factor in the BAFTA results (won by Kotsur over Smit-McPhee and Plemons, et al), Plemons wasn’t nominated and Kotsur prevailed over Smit-McPhee (et al) anyway at the Critics’ Choice Awards and perhaps the most important predictor: The SAGs. Only twice since 2007 have the SAGs and Oscars not aligned in this category. (The CCAs have the same rate of alignment, but not the same membership overlap with the academy as the SAGs) The betting community seems to agree. “Kotsur’s chances have tripled from +400 a month ago (20% implied probability) into -150 (60%),” according to Pete Watt of Covers.com. Smit-McPhee had led all season for good reason: Claudia Puig calls his portrayal “haunting”; Anne Thompson calls it “riveting”; Glenn Whipp says the movie “belongs to Smit-McPhee. He’s the reason you probably watched it more than once.” The other nominees: Ciarán Hinds for “Belfast” and previous winner J.K. Simmons for “Being the Ricardos.”   1. “The Power of the Dog”2. “Belfast”3. “CODA”4. “West Side Story”5. “Dune”6. “King Richard”7. “Drive My Car”8. “Licorice Pizza”9. “Don’t Look Up”10. “Nightmare Alley” “The Power of the Dog” is still the leader of the pack, but no longer by consensus. Kenneth Branagh’s “Belfast” and Sian Heder’s “CODA” have both closed the gap considerably, though “Dog” did collect the award at both the BAFTAs and the CCAs. Jane Campion’s noirish investigation of toxic masculinity led all movies with 12 Oscar nominations, including receiving nods in every category the BuzzMeter predicted it would — even adding one to that list (Jesse Plemons’ supporting-actor nod). As panelist Glenn Whipp says, “ ‘The Power of the Dog’ led the field with 12 nominations. Let’s not get too cute here. Unless the bias against streamers runs really deep, Jane Campion’s western will win.” “CODA” makes a huge jump following its series of wins on the circuit including the SAG ensemble award, from No. 8 to No. 3. After Heder’s film, three others are bunched in the pack: Reinaldo Marcus Green’s “King Richard,” Denis Villeneuve’s “Dune” and Steven Spielberg’s “West Side Story” are separated by just a handful of points. Making 2022 the fourth year in a row in which a non-English-language film is nominated for best picture is “Drive My Car,” winner of a host of critics’ prizes, including the LAFCA awards for best picture and screenplay, and runner-up for director. The Haruki Murakami adaptation received Oscar noms in all three of those categories, plus one for international feature, giving it a “Parasite"-like sheen — though not likely shiny enough a coat to overcome the power of the “Dog.” The academy declined to include any of 2021’s Top 10 grossers (domestic or worldwide) in the best-picture field, leaving “Dune” the lone blockbuster-ish nominee — unless one counts “Don’t Look Up.” Netflix’s unverified accounting claims that film has logged close to 400 million streaming hours, whatever that means, relative to box office equivalence or even total viewers. Who knows? “Don’t Look Up” may have split the critics (just above 50% on Rotten Tomatoes), but it’s “Nightmare Alley” distantly bringing up the rear in Round 3. Martin Scorsese may enthusiastically endorse Guillermo del Toro’s dark carnival (and also may be clicking his heels over Marvel not landing a best-picture nomination for “Spider-Man: No Way Home”), but panelist Tim Cogshell scoffs: “That the academy is numb to how much people dislike ‘Nightmare Alley’ is surprising.” Prominent absences include “The Lost Daughter,” “Spencer,” “Tick, Tick ... Boom!,” “House of Gucci” and “Being the Ricardos.”   1. Jane Campion (“The Power of the Dog”)2. Paul Thomas Anderson (“Licorice Pizza”)3. Ryûsuke Hamaguchi (“Drive My Car”)4. Kenneth Branagh (“Belfast”)5. Steven Spielberg (“West Side Story”) Jane Campion is the first woman to be nominated for best director twice. She’s also one of only two consensus picks to win her category in Round 3 of the BuzzMeter. From all indications, her faux pas at the Critics’ Choice Awards hasn’t significantly dampened her candidacy (at least not among the panelists, none of whom changed their votes for her). The helmer of “The Power of the Dog” has been on top all awards season long, and the panel continues to think “Dog” could have its day, making its adapter-producer-director the third woman to win in the directing category. It’s funny to think of one of the world’s most respected filmmakers for decades as “this year’s anything,” but Campion’s triple noms this year (including one for screenplay) are analogous to Chloé Zhao’s four-nom feat of last year. If Campion wins in all three of her categories, as the panel expects her to do, she would top Zhao’s win total (in the directing and best picture categories). Both film and director are heavy favorites among both industry watchers and betting concerns. Covers.com, for instance, has Campion ahead with the widest margin in any category listed (-700 to win, vs. runner-up Steven Spielberg at +850 — a huge gap). Panelist Anne Thompson calls Campion “a lock”; Dave Karger says “Campion seems assured to follow Chloé Zhao as a winner here” and Justin Chang and Claudia Puig both see echoes of the previous Campion-Spielberg matchup, with a different result: “She is facing off against Steven Spielberg again, as she did in 1993, when he won for ‘Schindler’s List,’ ” says Puig. “Only this time she’ll win.” Should Ryûsuke Hamaguchi, a longshot (as is everyone whose last name doesn’t rhyme with “champion”), triumph for “Drive My Car,” he’d be the third straight Asian filmmaker to pull off the feat — after none in the previous 90 or so years of the awards. (That’s right, Akira Kurosawa never won a competitive Oscar.) Of the omissions, Panelist Tim Cogshell says, “I’d swap [‘King Richard’s’ Reinaldo Marcus] Green for several of those nominated, and I’d bump a couple for Maggie Gyllenhaal and her film (‘The Lost Daughter’) in both categories.” Others who didn’t make the cut despite strong credentials include Denis Villeneuve, whose “Dune” received 10 nominations including best picture, and who had received a DGA nom; Pedro Almodóvar; and the other three directors whose movies are in the best picture field: Sian Heder (“CODA”), Adam McKay (“Don’t Look Up”) and Guillermo del Toro (“Nightmare Alley”).   1. Olivia Colman (“The Lost Daughter”)2. Jessica Chastain (“The Eyes of Tammy Faye”)3. Nicole Kidman (“Being the Ricardos”)4. Penélope Cruz (“Parallel Mothers”)5. Kristen Stewart (“Spencer”) In what has been the most volatile of all the races the BuzzMeter tracks, the favorites just a couple of weeks ago now have a new No. 2 contender among them: Jessica Chastain of “The Eyes of Tammy Faye.” Olivia Colman (“The Lost Daughter”), Kristen Stewart (“Spencer”) and Nicole Kidman (“Being the Ricardos”), the top three after the noms were announced, remain tightly bunched — even more so with Chastain shoehorning her way into the pack. After Colman, just three points separate the other four contenders, including Penélope Cruz (“Parallel Mothers”). However, Stewart has fallen to the fifth position. Colman retains the top spot in this sort-of Round 3.1, but splits the No. 1 picks evenly among the panelists — three picked her; three picked Chastain. Why the extreme movement, Chastain jumping from No. 5 to No. 2 on the BuzzMeter? Because of her big wins at the SAGs and CCAs. The BAFTAs provided no clarity for the category, as in a rarity, there was no overlap at all between their nominations and the Oscars’ (Joanna Scanlan won for “After Love”). How close is the race? Many betting concerns still have no clear favorite (no one in “minus money”), with the top two (for instance, Kidman at +120 and Stewart at +175 at one site) hardly separated at all. However, Pete Watt of Covers.com says Chastain was "+500 (16.7% implied probability) ... [and] is now as short at -150 (60% IP).” In other words, the betting community has taken notice as well. Panelist Justin Chang sums up the competition’s “clarity” thus: “A race of utterly devilish complexity, made even more so by Lady Gaga’s startling omission. Trust no one who says they know what’ll happen. That said … Olivia Colman. No, Nicole Kidman. No, Kidman Stewart. Yes, Stewart. Stewart, for sure. I think. I hope.” There was some question whether Stewart would make the final five, following her omissions from prominent lists including SAG and BAFTA, but the BuzzMeter never doubted her. The panel correctly predicted all five nominees, including Cruz, another surprising SAG snub.    1. Will Smith (“King Richard”)2. Benedict Cumberbatch (“The Power of the Dog”)3. Denzel Washington (“The Tragedy of Macbeth”)4. Andrew Garfield (“Tick, Tick…Boom!”)5. Javier Bardem (“Being the Ricardos”) The panel sees this race tightening considerably between Will Smith (“King Richard”) and Benedict Cumberbatch (“The Power of the Dog”). Smith holds serve for the lead, but Cumberbatch closes the gap, likely due to the not-inconsiderable goodwill the academy showed “Dog” (12 nominations). Smith, however, has been sweeping the awards circuit (wins from the SAGs, BAFTA and CCAs, among many others), solidifying his candidacy. Javier Bardem (“Being the Ricardos”), Andrew Garfield (“Tick, Tick…Boom!”) and Denzel Washington (“The Tragedy of Macbeth) are also nominated. Nicolas Cage (“Pig”), Clifton Collins Jr. (“Jockey”), Bradley Cooper (“Nightmare Alley”), Hidetoshi Nishijima (“Drive My Car”), Adam Driver (“Annette” and “House of Gucci”) Mahershala Ali (“Swan Song”) are not, with Peter Dinklage (“Cyrano”) among the more surprising omissions. Panelist Justin Chang says, “ ‘Benedict Cumberbatch and Will Smith will split the majority vote, allowing Andrew Garfield to sneak through’ is the kind of ridiculous theory that never pans out. That said … I sort of hope it does?” While panelist Tim Cogshell says, “To not be nominated most often means one was just not nominated; it does not necessarily mean that one was snubbed. That said ... Peter Dinklage was not nominated for his phenomenal performance in ‘Cyrano’ — he was snubbed!”   1. Ariana DeBose (“West Side Story”)2. Kirsten Dunst (“The Power of the Dog”)3. Aunjanue Ellis (“King Richard”)4. Jessie Buckley (“The Lost Daughter”)5. Judi Dench (“Belfast”) Ariana DeBose remains a strong favorite for her renewal of Rita Moreno’s previously Oscar-winning role in “West Side Story,” with Kirsten Dunst also receiving a lot of love from the panel for her work in “The Power of the Dog.” DeBose, who has been racking up wins from critics’ groups including the Los Angeles Film Critics’ Association, also took the SAG, BAFTA and CCA, which bodes very well for her candidacy. Since Kate Winslet took the SAG Awards’ supporting prize for “The Reader” in 2009 while collecting the lead trophy for the same film from the Oscars, the guild and the academy have only failed to align in this category once (2018). DeBose stands to join some awfully exclusive clubs (along with Moreno), should she triumph. Panelist Claudia Puig confidently picks her for her “brilliant performance,” saying, “It’s certainly time for another Latina to win an acting Oscar, though it would be nice if it wasn’t always for the same role.” Meanwhile, panelist Tim Cogshell says while he was “smitten” with DeBose’s work, “Kirsten Dunst is still very much in the mix.” Aunjanue Ellis (‘King Richard’) makes the cut, as expected, along with two who weren’t in the upper echelon of the BuzzMeter’s Round 2 list: Judi Dench (“Belfast”) and Jessie Buckley (“The Lost Daughter”). Among those omitted, including favorite Caitríona Balfe (“Belfast”), Riley Keough (“Zola”), Saniyya Sidney (“King Richard”), Olga Merediz (“In the Heights”), one favorite solicited a particularly pained comment: “Ruth Negga, like ‘Passing,’ is too good for the Oscars,” said panelist Justin Chang of the actress and film the academy completely, um, passed over.   1. “Licorice Pizza”2. “Belfast”3. “King Richard”4. “The Worst Person in the World”5. “Don’t Look Up” Two odes to auteurs’ hometowns comfortably top the list: Paul Thomas Anderson’s fantasia on the ‘70s Valley, “Licorice Pizza”; and Kenneth Branagh’s fond remembrance of the environs of his youth, “Belfast.” They’re close in the points totals, but the panel gives the edge to “Licorice.” “Paul Thomas Anderson now has 11 Oscar nominations. I’d say he’s overdue for a trophy,” says panelist Glenn Whipp, echoing the sentiment of several. On the other hand, panelist Dave Karger says, “Paul Thomas Anderson could very well win for his love letter to L.A., but I’m thinking Kenneth Branagh will finally win an Academy Award after eight nominations spanning an astonishing seven different categories.” “King Richard” lands a spot, and as those sneaky Buzz People suspected it might, Sweden’s “The Worst Person in the World” gets one as well. Perhaps to the chagrin of some, “Don’t Look Up” grabs a nom, but it couldn’t have been that big a surprise — it also earned a WGA nod. Notably not on the list: Wes Anderson’s love letter to literary journalism, “The French Dispatch”; Mike Mills’ “C’mon C’mon,” Pedro Almodóvar’s “Parallel Mothers” and the highly regarded “Luca” from Disney-Pixar.    1. “The Power of the Dog”2. “The Lost Daughter”3. (tie) “CODA”3. (tie) “Drive My Car”5. “Dune” Jane Campion’s adaptation of Thomas Savage’s novel, “The Power of the Dog” remains the favorite — she’s a previous winner in the original screenplay category, for “The Piano” — but “Drive My Car,” by director/co-writer Ryûsuke Hamaguchi and co-writer Takamasa Oe, and Maggie Gyllenhaal’s adaptation of Elena Ferrante’s novel, “The Lost Daughter,” are not far behind. Panelist Dave Karger says, “March 27 stands to be an unforgettable night for Jane Campion — this is one of three Oscars I expect her to win that evening.” In Round 3.1, “The Lost Daughter” climbs to the No. 2 spot and “CODA” moves into a tie for No. 3 with “Drive My Car,” despite some of the panelists’ most passionate support being for the Japanese film. “Drive My Car” not only expands a Haruki Murakami short story into a multilayered, three-hour feature, but mines two other Murakami stories and uses the unique device of a multilingual theatrical production of “Uncle Vanya” to plumb the depths of Chekhov’s text. Whipp says, “ ‘Drive My Car’ is the clear standout, a screenplay that retains the intimacy of its source material while expanding it to a grand, simmering story of love and regret.” While Chang says, “Here’s hoping academy voters (ahem) Chekhov ‘Drive My Car’ on their ballots.” “CODA” writer-director Sian Heder populated her American version of the French film “La Famille Bélier” with memorable characters and relationships. And for his tactile, atmospheric adaptation of Frank Herbert’s classic science-fiction novel “Dune” (10 nominations), writer-director Denis Villeneuve embraced the book’s sociopolitical themes and characters, and showed the wisdom to not try to squeeze the whole thing into one film. Perhaps the most surprising omission: Tony, Pulitzer and Emmy winner Tony Kushner‘s “West Side Story” update, which greatly deepens the context of the story’s environs and several characters’ backstories, and which was surely a key component to the success of the best-picture nominee.    1. “Drive My Car” (Ryûsuke Hamaguchi, Japan)2. “The Worst Person in the World” (Joachim Trier, Norway)3. “Flee” (Jonas Poher Rasmussen, Denmark)4. “The Hand of God” (Paolo Sorrentino, Italy)5. “Lunana: A Yak in the Classroom” (Pawo Choyning Dorji, Bhutan) “Drive My Car” is, of course, the strong frontrunner here, considering its support from the panel in so many other categories — not to mention its nominations in three other major Oscar categories (adapted screenplay, director and picture). It has been a behemoth all awards season long and the second of two consensus picks in Round 3 of the BuzzMeter. While the panelists acknowledge the film’s juggernaut status (Justin Chang writes, “There’s no suspense over whether ‘Drive My Car’ will win here. The question is whether that’s all it will win.”), both Tim Cogshell and Anne Thompson see “Worst Person in the World” as viable competition. Thompson says, “‘Drive My Car,’ with director, screenplay, and best picture nominations, should handily take this, but the more accessible ‘The Worst Person in the World’ also landed a screenplay nod.” “Lunana: A Yak in the Classroom” may have the best title among the nominees, but the panel does not expect it to put a Bhutan its competition’s backside: It ranks last in Round 3. Meanwhile, “Flee” makes Oscar history by being nominated in three feature categories: International, Animated and Documentary. Panelist Dave Karger says, “This is an easy win for the beloved ‘Drive My Car.’ ‘Flee,’ meanwhile, will have the distinction of losing in three different best feature categories.”   1. “Encanto”2. “The Mitchells vs. the Machines”3. “Luca”4. “Raya and the Last Dragon”5. “Flee” The Lin-Manuel Miranda/magical realism-powered “Encanto” holds onto the top spot (“I think ‘Encanto’ is going to charm the Academy as much as it delighted me,” says panelist Claudia Puig), but “The Mitchells vs. the Machines,” the off-kilter, freewheeling saga of an imperfect family battling perfect robots, creeps even closer in Round 3.1. Panelist Glenn Whipp thinks the Disney film’s other Oscar nods are indicative of the academy’s mood: “ ‘Encanto’ picked up nominations for score and song as well, a sign of its popularity. It’s a sure thing.” And that’s not to mention its massive success on the music charts — all eight of Miranda’s songs charted at the same time and the soundtrack is the most successful in years. Its eight nonconsecutive weeks at No. 1 (so far) make it one of only three albums of any kind to notch that many in the last five years, according to Billboard. That popular groundswell can’t hurt its Oscar chances. Plus, it won the BAFTA. However, “Mitchells” won the CCA and dominated the Annies with eight awards, including best feature. Rounding out the Top 5: international feature contender “Flee,” Pixar’s “summer reverie,” as panelist Anne Thompson describes “Luca” and Disney’s “Raya and the Last Dragon.” Among the major titles left off the final list: Anime master Mamoru Hosoda’s wild reimagining of “Beauty and the Beast” in the cyber age, “Belle,” and the French mountain-climbing drama, “The Summit of the Gods.” Tim Cogshell says, “‘The Summit of the Gods’ was the most thrilling and engaging animated film this year, but ‘Belle’ is the most delightful and my favorite.”   