As the effort to oust Gov. Gavin Newsom heads to the ballot on Sept. 14, a key question is whom voters would pick to replace him. Here’s a look at how that part of the election would play out. The special recall election has been scheduled for Sept. 14. Voters will be asked two questions on the ballot. The first is whether they want to get rid of Newsom. The second is if Newsom is recalled, regardless of how they voted on the first question, who do they want to replace him? If more than 50% of voters support ousting Newsom, then the top vote-getter in the second question automatically becomes governor, regardless of how many votes that person gets.  Candidates had until July 16 to file papers to run. Candidates must be American citizens who are registered to vote, or qualified to vote, at the time they obtain nomination papers. They cannot have been convicted of offering, giving or taking a bribe, embezzling public money, perjury or related crimes. They cannot run if they have served two terms as governor since Nov. 6, 1990 (so, no, Jerry Brown cannot run again). They must also submit 65 to 100 valid signatures on their nominations papers, pay a $4,194.94 filing fee or turn in at least 7,000 valid signatures in lieu of the filing fee, according to the secretary of state’s office. California Secretary of State Shirley Weber has declared that Newsom’s recall rivals must release five years of tax returns prior to the election, based on a law passed by the state Legislature in the aftermath of President Trump’s refusal to furnish such records. Legal experts from both sides disputed Weber’s interpretation of the law, and a California Superior Court judge on July 21 ruled that it did not apply to recall elections.  The target of the recall — Newsom — is barred from appearing on the replacement section of the ballot.  Though more than 70 candidates filed preliminary paperwork with the Fair Political Practices Commission to run for governor during the recall, 46 will appear on the ballot, the secretary of state’s office announced July 21. However, one of them — former Rep. Doug Ose — withdrew from the race in August after suffering a heart attack. Five prominent Republicans are among the candidates who are still campaigning to replace Newsom:      Others who are running include:    There are nine registered Democrats on the ballot but none well known to the public. Newsom and his allies were successful in keeping prominent Democrats out of the race, allowing them to present a united Democratic front and to continue painting the recall as a GOP power grab to accomplish through a special election what it can’t through a regular campaign. That also avoids a repeat of the 2003 recall, when Davis allies believe Lt. Gov. Cruz Bustamante’s decision to run as an insurance option in case the recall was successful cost the governor Democratic votes. Among the Democrats who decided not to run is former Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa. “I respect the fact the recall qualified. I also recognize that many people disagree with the governor and some of his decisions — including me — but California’s facing incredible challenges and the governor deserves a chance to finish the job,” Villaraigosa said. “That’s why I oppose the recall and support Gov. Newsom in this matter.” Some strategists had argued that it was imperative to have a prominent Democrat on the ballot on the chance Newsom is recalled. While the governor is in a strong position in polling and fundraising, Democrats took a notable risk: If Newsom’s fortunes fall and he is ousted, the state’s next governor will almost certainly be a Republican.  A new governor would be sworn in once Weber certifies the election results, which she must do within eight days of the counties finishing their official tallies. So if the recall is successful, the new governor would likely be sworn in about a week before Halloween. 